.\"                                      Hey, vim: ft=nroff
.\" .UC 4
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH "hdate" "1" "2013-01-01" "Linux" "libhdate"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7). Also refer to groff(7).
.SH "NAME"
hdate \- displays Hebrew date information for a given Gregorian/Julian date
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B hdate
.RI [ options "] [" coordinates "] [" timezone "] [" datespec ]
.P
.B hdate
.RI [ options "] [" coordinates "] [" timezone "] [" julian_day ]
.TP
.IR coordinates\: " \fB\-l\fP [N|S]" yy [. yyy "] " "    \fB\-L\fP" " [E|W]" xx [. xxx ]
.RE
.RS 19
.RI "\fB\-l\fP [N|S]" yy [: mm [: ss "]] \fB\-L\fP [E|W]" xx [: mm [: ss ]]
.RE
.RS 7
.IR "timezone:   \fB\-z\fP nn" "[(."nn |: mm ")]"
.RE
.RS 19
.RI "\fB\-z\fP [" timezone_name "] (see below)"
.RE
.RS 7
.IR datespec ":   see section \fBACCEPTABLE DATE FORMATS\fP"
.PP
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
\fBhdate\fP provides the date according to the Hebrew calendar, that day's corresponding date according to the gregorian calendar, and optionally providess further information about that Hebrew date, including holidays and astronomical-related times (see section \fBLOCATIONS\fP). If no arguments are given, \fBhdate\fP provides information for the current date. If a single numeric argument is given, \fBhdate\fP interprets it as a year, and provides the requested information for \fIall\fP days of that year. If two arguments are given, \fBhdate\fP interprets them  as a month and a year, and provides the requested information for \fIall\fP days of that month.
.PP 
.B INPUTTING A HEBREW DATE:
\fBhdate\fP interprets year values greater than 3000 as Hebrew dates. Numeric Hebrew months are interpreted as 1-12 for Tishrei - Elul; 13 and 14 for Adar I and Adar II. Currently, the maximum value \fBhdate\fP accepts for a Hebrew year is 10999.
.PP 
.B INPUTTING A GREGORIAN DATE:
\fBhdate\fP interprets year values in the range 1000 - 2999 as gregorian. Numeric months are interpreted as 1-12 for January - December.
.PP
.B INPUTTING A JULIAN DAY:
If a single numeric argument is provided, and that argument is \fIgreater\fP than 348021, \fBhdate\fP interprets it as a "julian day number" and provides information for that Julian day's corresponding Hebrew date. See section \fBJULIAN DAY\fP.
.PP
.B ACCEPTABLE DATE FORMATS:
Prior versions of \fBhdate\fP insisted on the numeric date format
.RI [[ yyyy " [" mm "  [" dd ]]].
\fBhdate\fP now accepts numeric date elements in any easily discernable order. \fBhdate\fP now accepts Hebrew month names and gregorian month names in both full and abbreviated formats, and not case-sensitive. Gregorian month names may be entered in either your locale's language or in English. Hebrew month names may be entered in either Hebrew characters or in many transliteration forms to latin characters (see \fBEXAMPLES\fP). \fBhdate\fP will intelligently interpret ambiguous numeric \fIdatespec\fP parameters. For example, a parameter "32" could only legitimately be a two-digit year, so \fBhdate\fP will, by default, interpretat it as a two-digit Hebrew year in the current (58th) century (see option \fB--prefer-gregorian\fP and section \fBCONFIG FILES\fP).
.PP
.SH "OPTIONS"
.TP 18
.B \-b --bidi
output Hebrew information in Hebrew, but in reverse
.RE
.RS 7
.B \ \ \ --visual
\      sequence.
.TP 18
.B \-d --diaspora
force diaspora readings and holidays.
.RS 3
.B --israel
\      force Eretz Yisroel readings an holidays.
.RE
.TP
.B \ \ \ --daf-yomi
.TP
.B \-e --emesh
begin printing times-of-day at sunset or candle
.RS 3
.B --erev
\        lighting. This is the default.
.RE
.RS 3
.B --no-emesh
.RE
.RS 3
.B --no-erev
.RE
.TP
.B \-h --holidays
print holiday name if day is a holiday, and print \fIcustom day\fP name if day is marked as a \fIcustom day\fP. See section \fBHOLIDAYS AND CUSTOM DAYS\fi.
.TP
.B \-H 
print only if day is a holiday or a \fIcustom day\fP, and print the name of that holiday or \fIcustom day\fP.
.TP
.B \-i --ical 
use iCal formatted output.
.TP
.B \-j --julian
print Julian day number.
.TP
.B \-m --menu
prompt user-defined menu from config file. See there for details and examples.
.TP
.B \-o --omer
print Sefirat Ha Omer, number of days only.
.RE
.RS 25
.BR \-oo " 'today is n days in the omer'"
.RE
.RS 25
.BR \-ooo " the full text, with weeks and remainder days"
.RE
.RS 10
.BR --ba-omer "      full omer text, as " \-ooo ", in Hebrew"
.RE
.RS 10
.BR --la-omer "      full omer text, as " \-ooo ", in Hebrew"
.RE
.RS 7
.TP
.BR "\-q --quiet" "        suppress output, available in four levels:"
.RE
.RS 10
.BR "--quiet-alerts       \-q" "    suppresses warning messages"
.RE
.RS 10
.BR "--quiet-gregorian    \-qq" "   also suppresses the gregorian date"
.RE
.RS 10
.BR "--quiet-descriptions \-qqq" "  also suppresses data labels"
.RE
.RS 10
.BR "--quiet-hebrew       \-qqqq" " also suppresses the Hebrew date"
.RE
.RS 7
.TP 18
.B \-r --parasha
print weekly reading if day is Shabbat.
.TP
.B \-R 
print only if day is a Shabbat on which the regular weekly reading is read (ie. not a special holiday reading), and print that weekly reading.
.TP
.B \ \ \ --sun
print sunrise and sunset times.
.RE
.RS 7
.B \ \ \ --sunrise
.RE
.RS 7
.B \ \ \ --sunset
.TP 18
.B \-s --shabbat
print Shabbat start and end times. Use a specific long option to modify its default.
.RS 0
.B \ \ \ --shabbat-times
.RS 0
.B \ \ \ --candles
\     default is 20 minutes before sunset. (17<n<91)
.RS 0
.B \ \ \ --candle-lighting
.RS 0
.B \ \ \ --havdalah
\    default is 3 stars. (19<n<91 minutes)
.TP 18
.B \-S --short-format
print using short format.
.TP
.B \-t --times
print day times (three verbosity levels):
.RS 0
.B \ \ \ --times-of-day \-t
\ \ \ first light, talit, sunrise, mid day, sunset,
.RS 0
.B \ \ \ --day-times
\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ first stars, three stars,
.RE
.RS 24
and the length of that day's sun-hour.
.RE
.RS 18
.B \-tt
\ \ adds end_Shema_(GR"A), end_amidah,
.RE
.RS 24
mincha_gedola, mincha_ketana, plag_hamincha.
.RE
.RS 18
.B \-ttt
\ adds end_Shema_(M"A).
.RE
.RS 18
.B \-tttt
adds erev Pesach times
.P
Instead of using the presets, customize with:
.B "--first-light --midday        --shekia"
.RS 0
.RE
.B "--alot        --noon          --tzeit-hakochavim"
.RS 0
.RE
.B "--talit       --chatzot       --first-stars"
.RS 0
.RE
.B "--netz        --mincha-gedola --three-stars"
.RS 0
.RE
.B "--shema       --mincha-ketana --magen-avraham"
.RS 0
.RE
.B "--amidah      --plag-hamincha --sun-hour"
.RS 0
.RE
.B "--sunrise     --sunset"

.RS 0
.RE
.RE
.B \ \ \ --erev-pesach
\ if the day is 14 Nissan, print the following times:
.RS 18
.B "--end-eating-chometz-ma   --end-eating-chometz-gra"
.RS 0
.RE
.B "--end-owning-chometz-ma   --end-owning-chometz-gra"
.RE
.TP 18
.B  -T --table
print tabular output. All data for each requested day
.RS 0
.B \ \ \ --tabular
\     will be output on a single comma-delimited line. Most
.RS 18
suitable for piping, or export to spreadsheets
.RE
.TP 18
.B \-l --latitude
.RI [ NS ] yy [. yyy "] decimal degrees, or [" NS ] yy [: mm [: ss "]] degrees, minutes, seconds. Negative values are South"
.TP
.B \-L --longitude
.RI [ EW ] xx [. xxx "] decimal degrees, or [" EW ] xx [: mm [: ss "]] degrees, minutes, seconds. Negative values are West"
.TP
.B \-z --timezone
either a timezone name (see section \fBTIMEZONES\fP) or numeric offset +/-UTC. Notation may  be in decimal hours
.RI ( hh [. hh "]) or hours, minutes (" hh [: mm ])
.TP
.B \ \   --hebrew
forces Hebrew to print in Hebrew characters
.TP
.B \ \   --yom
force Hebrew prefix to Hebrew day of week
.TP
.B \ \   --leshabbat
insert parasha between day of week and day
.TP
.B \ \   --leseder
insert parasha between day of week and day
.TP
.B \ \   --not-sunset-aware
don't display next day if after sunset
.TP
.B \ \   --data-first
display data, followed by it's description
.TP
.B \ \   --labels-first
display data descriptions before the data itself
.RE
.TP 23
.B \ \   --prefer-hebrew
how to interpret ambiguous month and year
.RS 0
.B \ \ \ --prefer-gregorian
\ parameters. (eg. interpret "6 10" as
.RS 23
"Adar 5710" or as "June 2010")
.SH NOTES
.SS TIMEZONES
\fBhdate\fP accepts as timezone parameters either an absolute numeric offset from UTC, or an official timezone name, as found on many *nix operating systems at \fI/usr/share/zoneinfo/zone.tab\fP. These names are typically in the form 'continent/city' (eg. Asia/Jerusalem); however, \fBhdate\fP is flexible and will accept any unique substring of a timezone name, and will report how it interpreted your input. For example, 'jer' will be interpreted as Israel time. Names use underscores in place of spaces, but \fBhdate\fP will accept spaces as long as the parameter is quoted ("w y" is acceptable for America/New_York, but so would be 'new'). When given a timezone name, \fBhdate\fP will be aware of daylight savings time transitions and will report times-of-day accordingly. When given no timezone information, \fBhdate\fP will try to find out your computer's local timezone. If that fails, it will attempt to find your computer's UTC offset. If all else fails, Jerusalem Standard time is used.
.SS LOCATIONS
If you want \fBhdate\fP to display accurate time-of-day information, \fBhdate\fP requires location and time zone information in order to make astronomical calculations for a given date. If you don't provide \fIany\fP such information, \fBhdate\fP tries to find out your computer's local time zone information as an indicator, and picks the 'primary' city in that time zone. If \fBhdate\fP can't find local time zone information, \fBhdate\fP tries to find out your computer's GMT offset, and either picks from the list below the city in that time zone offset, or defaults to the equator at the center of that time zone offset. If \fBhdate\fP can't even retrieve GMT offset information from your computer, it defaults to Tel-Aviv. For other locations, use the \fB\-l \-L\fP option pair. For other timezones, use the \fB-z\fP option. Co-ordinates and standard time zones for some common locations are listed below.
.PP
The current defaults are:
.RS 5
.I "tz                 Lat    Lon      tz              Lat     Lon"
.RE
.RS 5
-8   Los Angeles   34.05 -118.25    2    Tel-Aviv  32      34.75
.RE
.RS 5
-6   Mexico City   19.43  -99.13    3.5  Tehran    35.67   51.43
.RE
.RS 5
-5   New York City 40.75  -74       4    Moscow    55.75   37.62
.RE
.RS 5
-4.5 Caracas       10.54  -66.93    5    Tashkent  41.27   69.22
.RE
.RS 5
-3   Buenos Aires -34.61  -58.37    5.5  Calcutta  22.57   88.36
.RE
.RS 5
 0   London        51.5     0       8    Beijing   39.90  116.38
.RE
.RS 5
 1   Paris         48.86    2.34   10    Sydney   -33.87  151.21
.RE
.PP
Useful locations and time zones
.RS 6
.I "tz                 Lat    Lon      tz              Lat     Lon
.RE
.RS 6
2   Jerusalem     31.78   35.22    8   Hong Kong  22.26  114.15
.RE
.RS 6
2   Haifa         32.82   34.99   -6   Chicago    41.84  -87.67
.RE
.RS 6
2   Beer Sheva    31.25   34.80   -3   Sao Paolo -23.52  -46.63
.RE  
.RS 6
2   Ashdod        31.80   34.64   -5   Toronto    43.75  -79.38
.RS 6
.RE
2   Tiberias      40.89   35.84    1   Antwerpen  51.22    4.42
.RS 6
.RE
2   Eilat         29.56   34.95        
.SS HOLIDAYS AND CUSTOM DAYS
By default, if you ask \fBhdate\fP to display holiday names (options \fB\-h\fP or \fB--holidays\fP), \fBhdate\fP uses \fBlibhdate\fP's data set of the traditional 'shulchan aruch' Hebrew holidays. \fBhdate\fP also creates a user-modifiable config file, \fIcustom_days\fP, for any other personal or national days a user might want to mark. The config file contains detailed in-line documentation, and allows for simple definitions of \fIcustom days\fP by either the Hebrew or gregorian calendar; by either calendar day of a month or \fIn\fPth \fIday of week\fP of a month; and provides a simple method of specifying how/whether to advance/postpone a \fIcustom day\fP should it occur on any undesired day of week.
.SS JULIAN DAY
The julian day system is not directly related to the Julian calendar. Rather, it was introduced by astronomers for scientific use to provide a single system of dates that could be used when working with different calendars and to unify different historical chronologies. Julian day number (JDN) zero corresponds to January 1, 4713 BCE Greenwich noon, according to the "julian proleptic calendar".
.SS TABULAR OUTPUT
.RB "When invoked with option " \-T " ( " --table " or " --tabular " ), " hdate
outputs the requested data for any single day in comma-delimited format, with no intervening spaces. The only exception is that holidays and custom_days are delimited from \fIeach other\fP with semi-colons, because there may be more than one of those entries for any given day. When invoked for a month (no \fIdd\fP supplied) or a year (no \fIdd\fP or \fIdd\fP supplied), data for separate days are new-line-delimited. The first line of tabular output is a header line, describing each field being output, and delimited in the same way as the data line(s). Output of the header line can be suppressed using option
.BR \-qqq " ( " --quiet-descriptions " )."
.SH FILES
.SS CONFIG FILES
The config files and their parent folder will be automatically created. Each file includes its own documentation, in-line. Should you ever wish to restore a config file to its original text, rename or delete your current one; \fBhdate\fP will create a replacement automatically on its next invocation. Both \fBhdate\fP and \fBhcal\fP make use of identically formatted \fIcustom_days\fP files, so you may freely copy that file from one config folder to the other, or use a symbolic link so both programs will always use the same \fIcustom_days\fP information.

.RS 5
.RI ${ XDG_CONFIG_HOME } /hdate/hdaterc

.RI ${ XDG_CONFIG_HOME } /hdate/custom_days
.P
.RE
If ${\fIXDG_CONFIG_HOME\fP} is undefined:

.RS 5
.I ~/.config/hdate/hdaterc

.I ~/.config/hdate/custom_days
.SH "BUGS"
.TP 10
.B Accuracy
The accuracy of the astronomically-derived data will suffer from not accounting for environmental conditions such as elevation, horizon, temperature and air pressure.
.RE
.TP 10
.B Timezonesmu
The timezone support is currenlty primitive and lacks support for daylight savings time transitions.
.RE
.TP 10
.B Historical
The software does not yet account for the phenomenon and complications of the "Gregorian transition" from the prior, julian calendar, which effectively caused an instantaneous 'loss' of two weeks for all gentiles affected. Countries (eg. Poland, Spain and Italy) began adopting the Gregorian calendar on 8 Tishrei 5343 (4 October 1582 CE), although many did not transition until the 56th century (1752 CE, eg. UK colonies, Sweden). Russia did not adopt the Gregorian calendar until 5678 (1918 CE) and Turkey did not until 5687 (December, 1926 CE). Many other countries made the transition on other dates. Keep in mind that Russia invaded part of Poland, undoing, for the interim, the Gregorian transition for (only) that part of Poland; Also important to remember in this regard is that Eretz Ysroel was part of the Turkish Ottoman empire until the British mandate (5677 (1917 CE)). Until all this is accounted for adequately by this application, refer to '\fBncal \-p\fP' for a basic table of country transitions. However, keep in mind that European borders underwent many changes during the 426 years in question, so the accuracy of your data will depend on accurate knowledge of whether any particular date at any specific location was Julian or Gregorian.
.SH "EXAMPLES"
1. Create an iCal calendar of the holidays of year 2025.
.RS 6
.B       hdate \-Hi 2025
.RE
.HP 3
2. Print out the weekly readings and sunset/sunrise times for Eilat, on April 2031 CE.
.RS  6  
.B       hdate \-sR 4 2031 -l29 -L34 -z2
.SS Flexible date entry
hdate April ; hdate aPril; hdate tiSHREi; hdate 1 Elul 44; hdate 1 sep 1944; hdate 44 oct 21
.SS Flexible Hebrew month transliterations
tIchriy, jechvan, xeshvan, khechvan, kisayv, teivayt, sh\\'vat, addar, adarI, "adar A", adar_2, adar-alef, adaraleph, adARBeth, nissan, eeyar, ceevvan, taMUz, aV, elloul (and many more).
.RE
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR mlterm "(1), " hdate "(1) ," hebcal "(1), " date "(1), " ncal "(1), " cal "(1), " remind (1)
.SH "AUTHORS"
.RS 0
Boruch Baum 2011-2013. Yaacov Zamir 2005-2010.
.PP
project page: http://libhdate.sourceforge.net
.PP
\fBhcal\fP and \fBhdate\fP are part of the package \fBlibhdate\fP, a small C/C++ library for Hebrew dates, holidays, and reading
sequences (parashiot). It uses the source code from Amos Shapir's "hdate" package, as fixed and patched by Nadav Har'El. The Torah
reading sequence tables were contributed by Zvi Har'El.